We're here to talk about what I
reference as Einstein's crumbs. What did
Einstein do in 1905? And the dude was 26
years old. He writes a series of papers,
all of which completely knock the world
on its proverbial art. Yes. He said,
"Well, you know, what is speed? It's
it's the distance you cover in space
divided by the time elapsed." So, it has
to do with space and time. I mean, I
mean, that's a huge leap already. And he
said, "I'd rather that your measures of
space and time are relative than give up
the absolute nature of the speed of
light." Wow. So your very measuring
stick changes changes relative to the
other. So that you get the same answer.
So that you get the same answer. That's
crazy. Early 1900. Which drug is he on?
I know. Was it opiovailable?
He's not doing ketamine shots.
[Music]
This is Star Talk. Neil deGrasse Tyson.
You're a personal astrophysicist. Got
with me is my co-host, Harrison
Greenbound. Harrison, how you doing,
dude? Good to be here. All right. And
not your first Star Talk rodeo. Nope,
not at all. All right. All right. Maybe
it will be my first rodeo. I've never
done a rodeo. I think I would die
immediately. That's not happening here.
I promise. Uh, we're going to talk about
Einstein today. You going to help me out
on that? I've heard of him. I need more
help than that. He married his cousin. I
know that. Every time we talk about
Einstein and related subjects, we have
our go-to person at large, Jan 11.
Janet, welcome back to Star Talk. I'm
always glad to be here. You're like a
regular practically. I know cuz
Einstein's a regular. So, I know. I feel
like I just want to hang around here all
the time. Yeah. So, so Janet, you are
the TAL professor of physics and
astronomy at Barnard College of Columbia
University. Theoretical cosmologist.
Yeah. I mean, I say astrophysicist these
days. Or theoretical physicist only
because people think cosmology is like
cosmetology and stuff. Oh, okay. Right.
And they wanted me to do their makeup. I
want a fancy title. Fine. I'm not a
comedian. I'm a punchline engineer
specializing in haha building and giggle
construction. So, you're director of
sciences at the Pioneer Works in
Brooklyn, one of my favorite places.
This is quite the juxaposition of
science, creativity, and art. And it
just we're creative people on on both
sides of that fence, if there really is
one. Yeah. Come to come together and
express. I really feel like Pioneerics
is a sanctuary because science is part
of culture. We're not trying to hide it
in something else. We're not packaging
it in something else. It just exists out
there and it's a big appetite for it.
People want to know. And you've also
written a bunch of books. I have two
with me like right now. The black hole
survival guide. I mean, it's like it
looks tiny but it's dense like a black
hole.
Spoiler alert. It does not end well. It
does not end well. I I could have
guessed that. I think so. So, a black
hole death guy, not a black hole
survival guide. Exactly. The book is
normal size. Neil's hand is gigantic.
There's an element of truth to that.
And my favorite book I like to pronounce
the black hole blue. I love that.
That's the British cover. That's very
nice. Oh, yeah. So, yeah, I get I get
around. I get around. What's the
difference between the British and the
Is there an extra U? Yeah. Right. Well,
actually, they're completely different
covers. Yeah. They decide. Yeah.
Different countries, they have issues
with each other's cover. They changed
the Albert Einstein's teeth to make them
feel less bad. In one language in
translation, they changed my last name
to what? Levanova,
I think it was Czech. Wow. I thought
that was some serious license.
We'll help you out. We'll make it less
Jewy.
I kind of I kind of like Yeah, cuz it
made it like Italian almost. It's just a
thing. Women are loving. The ova. Okay.
Yeah. All right. It was a female thing.
So, we're we're here to talk about what
I've intermittently referenced as
Einstein's crumbs. You know, when you
eating a eating a meal that you enjoy
and something spills over the edge, you
don't even notice because the meal is so
good. And then you walk away with your
plate and other people see what's
spilled off of your plate. Say, "Hey, I
that's tasty. I want that. I can build I
can work with that." So in this analogy
the other scientists are my dog
who comes in and is like crumbs this is
the best. So these Nobel Prize winning
scientists are Rufus. Thank you. I had
not thought about it that just that way.
Let's benchmark ourselves Janna to do I
pronounce this right? Anisabulus.
It's Latin. I'll take it.
1905 quite a year. Just list for me.
What did Einstein do in 1905? And by and
the dude was 26 years old when this
happened. Go for it. So he writes a
series of papers, all of which
completely knock the world on its
proverbial art. Yes. Each one on its
anis, if you will.
I'm sure there's Latin for that. Um on
it morabulous anis. That's my dating
profile. So let's see. What are they?
Photoelectric effect. Yes. Which which
the photoelectric effect was the idea
that sometimes light behaved like a
particle and not a wave. And so
sometimes when you bombard a surface
with light, it will knock it like a
basketball might dislodge something from
place as opposed to accumulating energy
like a wave might. And so it really was
very shocking. Was that the first
demonstration that light could be also
referenced as particles? Yeah, it was
the first observation connection between
theory and observation that it is
actually behaving like a particle
sometimes. Very shocking because because
1800s we thought of light as a wave and
we often still do because it's very
convenient to do so sometimes and
sometimes it's acting like a wave. Yeah.
Um but here was an instance where it
really acted more like you threw a
basketball at something. Um a really
tiny basketball. A really tiny which was
incredible for Einstein to observe
because basketball hadn't been invented
yet. Yes. Right. Right. And I somehow
don't see him I don't know jing with the
sports analogy but anyway so
photoelectric effect shocker paper one
paper two paper two um special
relativity where he oh just that just
that so a lot of times so the theory of
relativity became this real colloquial
thing everything's relative and it
became invested in society I often say
it could have been called the theory of
absolutism because what Einstein really
had done is he had adhered to the
absolute limit of the speed of light he
took that more seriously ly than anybody
else was taking it at the time. In fact,
people were were struggling to get rid
of it. Uh this idea that the speed of
light was a constant and they were doing
everything they can to dethrone that
concept which really wasn't taking. So
it's not just that it's a constant. It's
that it's a constant no matter how when
or where you measure it. Absolutely.
You're getting the same answer. Even if
you're moving and the light is moving
relative to you, you measure the same
speed of light, right? Which doesn't
exist for anything else. That's insane.
That was an insane concept. cars coming
at each other are coming at each other
faster than if one of the cars stops,
right? Okay. But that is not true at the
speed of light. You run at the speed of
light. Maybe you're running slowly.
Maybe you're running near the speed of
light yourself. It's still coming at you
at the speed of light. It is chilling,
strange, seems impossible. A simple
example is I'm on the front of a train.
Let's say the train going 60 m hour and
I throw a ball 40 miles an hour. Can I
throw that fast? Probably not. Okay. I
know. I definitely could. I think you
can do anything. I can do anything. I
thought 40 miles an hour in front of the
train. You're standing on on at the
platform. How fast is the ball passing
you?
Right. Is it not adding the two up?
Yeah. Yeah. 100 miles. 100
milesPH. But I'm on the front of the
train. I mean, I'm not calculating the
speed. I'm worried that Needle Grass
Tyson's on the top of a train throwing
the ball. I'm very confused. So So now
I'm on the same 60 mph train. I shine a
beam of light and you measure the beam
of light going by you. It is the same
speed of light. It does. We don't add
the trade. We don't add the trade. We
don't add the trade. That's that that's
bat crazy. It is crazy. And
Einstein meditated on this for so long.
And there's kind of a simple way to see.
He he said, "Well, you know what is
speed? It's it's the distance you cover
in space divided by the time elapsed."
So, it has to do with space and time. I
mean, I mean, that's a huge leap
already. And he said, "I'd rather that
your measures of space and time are
relative than give up the absolute
nature of the speed of light." Wow. So
two, so your very measuring stick
changes changes relative to the other.
So that you get the same answer. So that
you get the same answer. That's that's
that's not your measure stick and your
rate the time ticks that that's crazy.
You get chills a little. So he's Which
drug is he on? I know. Was it opio? What
was available at the time? either. He's
not doing ketamine shots. No. Okay, give
me more. So, that's two. Um, brownie in
motion. Talk about Give me some brownie
emotion. So, if you I mean, I think that
feels like a dirty topic. I don't know
if that's appropriate for this. Oh,
actually, I'm not I bet Neil knows why
it was called brownie. There's a guy
there's a guy who first talked about the
statistical observed it but didn't fully
understand it. Mr. Brown, we've all
observed it. So, you go to a window, the
dustier the house, the better. You pull
the curtains aside and you start to see
all the particles move around. They
don't fall like rain. They bounce around
the dust particles. Yeah, the dust
particles. And you can see the
reflection of the dust in the air. You
know, it's a kind of a beautiful image.
The sight sunlight hitting reflecting
off the dust particles. Dusted apart. I
was going to say of grandma's my OCD
like clean. Yeah. Why have you let it go
so but we all have had that observation
and we all know it doesn't fall like
rain. Mhm. So Einstein also relates this
to the quantum nature of matter. He says
fundamentally air is not a continuum. If
I look at it at the microscopic level,
I'm going to realize it's made up of
individual molecules and the molecules
are moving randomly because they're
knocking into each other. They're
bouncing around. You call that brownie
in motion. So they bounce around
randomly because they're kind of
constantly knocking it banging into each
other as they move around. And um it was
more evidence for the quantum nature of
of reality in very early. In fact, I
think it was one of the first supportive
bits of evidence that atoms even exist.
That's right. Because you can if you in
other words, you can have a big you use
the air dust analogy, but in a in a in a
liquid solution, uh if you have a a
suspended particle that's larger than
the molecules themselves, the particle
sort of moves around in response to the
collective energy of all the particles
that are around it. And you can
calculate what should happen if this
liquid is composed of these tiny
particles and then you only get this
motion when you have atoms doing the
constant Yeah. Absolutely. And we talk
that's a better word. We we talk about
the temperature in the room all the
time, but what that really is is the
average of the thermal motions of an
awful lot of particles and the
statistical behavior later very well
predicted by Plunk. And so this was all
part of that early era of starting to
understand that if I look at a glass of
water, it is not a continuum. If I got
small enough, it is actually made up of
individual molecules. So, and it was in
the fourth paper, wasn't there? Um, E=
MC. Oh, that's a pretty good one. Okay.
Yeah. How could I forget about that one?
Yeah. Yeah. Which so that was the whole
paper. He just wrote E= MC.
This has been a busy year. Except they
didn't have mics then.
drop
totally a speaker
refrigerator drop. He was working in a
patent office, right? Refining things
like refrigerator coolants and
refrigerator cooling mechanisms. And at
the bottom drawer of his desk, he had
what he called the physics department.
And in the physics department, he was
working on these papers between refining
people's patents and E= MC is one of
the most gorgeous results, obviously
most famous equation. Obviously, we all
love this result and the implications of
it went so far beyond his initial
motivation for thinking about it, but
that's the point of this whole so far
beyond episode. I mean, it's changed the
world as we know it in so many ways. But
okay, so of those four results, yeah,
two of them were stapled together for
the one Nobel Prize that he got.
Brownian and photoelectric. Correct.
Right. And the So he's got one Nobel
Prize for two things that and not for
eagles. Not for not for relativity, let
alone general relativity which comes 11
years later. So for me, what's
intriguing is his Nobel Prize is some of
the least interesting work that he's
done with somebody who wins a Grammy for
their worst album. Well, it was
practical. It was practical. The Nobel
was always very attached to verifiable
results. So, it was very hard for
Stephen Hawking to get nominated for a
Nobel Prize. It was surprising to me
that even Roger Penrose not only was
nominated but was awarded the Nobel
Prize because they were so theoretical
and the Nobel Prize is often awarded for
things that have been verified by
experiment not a minute before certainly
in the day. That's the intention. That's
correct. That's correct because it was
the idea that if you're if it's a
theoretical result could could go with
the winds, right? You know, whereas you
have if you anchor it in an experiment
then we got we got legit. You become
legit. So So let's you did this all at
26 by the time you turned 26. Yeah, I'm
38. So, this is very demotivating.
Sorry. I'm already 12 years pass.
Look at us both consoling. This is until
you're 38. Okay. So, when Mozart was
your age, he was already dead for a
year. Okay. So, I don't mean to tell
your mom this. It's not going to happen.
You are such a disappointment.
As for Einstein's latest idea, we're
still chasing. CERN is building the
future circular collider, a massive
machine designed to explore dark matter,
antimatter, and the unknown edges of
physics. Ground News analyzed over a 100
articles covering this to pull the most
credible information into one place.
Depending on where you look, it's either
a triumph of human curiosity or a
multi-billion dollar waste of time.
Which is exactly why we rely on Ground
News. Our partners at ground News built
an app and website that bring clarity to
complex stories by showing how the
world's media from scientific sources
and original research to political and
international outlets cover the same
event. They were actually founded by a
former NASA engineer with the same level
of precision you'd expect for space
missions. But the best part, ground news
isn't some new tool to learn. They're a
smarter, better version of how you're
already staying informed. If you're
reading about this collider somewhere
else, their browser extension flags bias
and links you to dozens of science
focused highfactuality articles
instantly. We're giving our viewers 40%
off the same unlimited access vantage
plan we use. Just go to groundnews.star
talk or scan this QR code to bring the
cost of context and clarity down to $5 a
month. Be part of our mission to help
the world understand the cosmos more
clearly today. Now, back to the show.
So, let's pick up some of the crumbs
now. All right. So, let's talk about his
cosmological constant. Okay. What's up
with that? I love the cosmological
constants. It's like the guy couldn't be
wrong. It's like he couldn't be wrong.
Even when he was terribly wrong. Even
when he was terribly wrong, he was
right. He was somehow later would turn
out to be right. Yeah. So, one of the
crumbs, big a crumb, you don't even know
it's going to grow into an interesting
crumb later. So, your dog would need to
give it a chance before it laps it He
put it in his bed and he's leaving it.
Yeah, I should go look up some more
Einstein crumbs actually now that you're
maybe maybe this will give me some I got
invigorate ideas. Well, so Einstein
writes down the general theory of
relativity which goes beyond special
related 10 years later. Okay. Yeah.
Takes
kind that he wants to describe not just
that space and time are relative. Not
just that I can rotate space into time,
that they're one kind of spacetime, but
also that spacetime itself could maybe
curve, stretch, be mutable, respond to
matter and energy. That around the
earth, the reason why the apple falls
from the tree is because it's following
the natural curve in space created by
the mass of the earth. This is general
relativity. Now, he generalizes the
theory away from flat spacetime to
curved spacetime. Now once he does this
he still cannot predict everything that
this theory suggests. It's just
abundant. It's so abundant that today
people are still trying to find
solutions from the theory to describe
universes. And people came to him a
number of different scientists from
around the world very international
experiment and and over very quickly and
over the the next couple of years said
you know your theory predicts that the
universe is expanding. So other people
are studying his theory. They're
imagining what if I have an average
distribution of galaxies in there, all
this stuff now. But I I smooth it out. I
imagine it's it's pretty smooth out
there. And they say, "How is spaceime
mutable in response to this distribution
of energy?" And you would sort of think,
well, a lot of gravity means things are
going to recolapse. Everything is mass.
And so, you know, it's all going to pull
towards each other and it's going to
cause a collapse of the universe. In
which case, the universe shouldn't be
static, stable, or permanent. And
Einstein really is resistant to this
idea. He does not like it. And he he
says to himself, I I must have made a
mistake in my fundamental equations of
general relativity that describe every
possible scenario in the universe. And
he adds something called the
cosmological constant because
technically mathematically it was
consistent with Einstein's laws. And if
you're being completely thorough, you
would have included this term called
this cosmological constant. And it's
this magic term. doesn't know what it is
physically, doesn't know what it refers
to in terms of known forms of matter.
So, you can have a math representation
of an idea, not all of which actually
applies to reality. Yeah. I also like
the idea that you just like throw that
in and be like, I don't know if my
theory is right, but I there's this
magical extra thing and now it's right.
He knew it was mathematically
consistent. That's exactly what
he legit. He said, "Look, maybe nature
produces an energy density that's
uniform across space and time and it is
an absolute constant and it has this
very different property that it actually
pushes the universe outward and if I
tune it to exactly the right value, I'm
going to balance things and the universe
will not collapse and it will be
permanent and it will it will exist that
way forever. The universe is doing
anything at all." Right. But the ow it
doesn't owe you. Right. The universe is
just there and if it's just there you
got to somehow stabilize it. Yes. So he
stabilized the universe with the
cosmological constant. There you go.
There. Now he has a universe that's
permanent, has lived forever, will last
forever, but not so fast because very
quickly people study the mathematics of
this and they say it's very unstable.
You basically have stood a pencil on its
tip on the top of a hill and said it's
stable. I mean you can do it for a
second, but it very quickly wants to
fall over and begin to do something.
It'll fall in one direction or the other
or the other. And the two directions in
this case collapse or expansion. Yes,
there you go. So, either the universe is
collapsing or it's expanding. It does
not want to stay static. And uh he
called it his greatest blunder. Now, he
made a lot of kind of mathematical
mistakes. So, he was not afraid of that.
And he was really so experimental and so
daring. So, the idea that he even called
it a blunder, I think, was because it
was a blunder of intuition. Wait, wait,
wait. Resistance. Wait, but wait, it's
not a blunder until it's a blunder. So
he puts it in reluctantly and then
Hubble comes along later later
in the telescope came first. Yes.
Edwin Hubble. Yes. Comes along in the
same decade discovers that the universe
is not static. It's expanding. Mhm. So
now we're okay because that's one of the
signs. That's one of the signs. And so
you don't even need the cosmological
const. You don't even need the
cosmological constant. So he comes along
and says look the universe is not
dominated by the cosmological constant
from what what he could measure. It's
dominated by the galaxies and the
galaxies are in fact expanding away from
each other. The universe is in fact
expanding and um it was a real shock. We
had no physical way to understand a
force or pressure in the universe going
opposite gravity. There was there was no
there was no way there was no and then
philosophically what is it expanding
into? I know that's we haven't got
there. We'll get there. Yeah. But but
you know, at the time Einstein was first
doing this, especially 1905, I mean, he
didn't know there were other galaxies
out there. I mean, imagine that. We knew
about the Milky Way, our our little
island of hundreds, the stars in the
night sky and that was that. And I mean
he imagined I mean but but it wasn't
until Hubble that we identified that
some of those objects out there really
were first of all other galaxies and
that they were all moving away
essentially on average and that it
looked like the universe was in fact
expanding. So at that point he doesn't
need the cosmological constant and then
he declares his greatest blunder his and
then fast forward to 1998 right and
there it is and we discover the
cosmological constant operating in the
universe. It's measured and it wins a
Nobel Prize for him.
No. God damn it.
Plus they don't give it to you if you're
dead. All right. No, they don't they
don't announce it might have happened
unless you're alive. But if you die
between the announcement and the award
ceremony, then you're okay. Then you're
still
hold on. You got to hold on to the
announcement. Yeah. If you die, you
still get the award, but you're dead.
All right. So, in this sense, what he
rejects as a blunder becomes an actual
measurement and they get the Nobel Prize
for making that measurement. So now the
reason why they can measure it even
though it's not static, you might think,
oh, they could only measure it if it
made the universe static or something.
It it actually was very unstable. What
it really wants to do is kind of
dominate. So as all the energy density
in the universe kind of slowly waines,
this constant is eventually there to
peak above all the others as they dilute
away. It just doesn't go away. And so
eventually there's a permanent feature
of the background permanent feature.
It's crazy empty space, right? There's
no way that it is the energy of empty
space. The energy of empty space. So
eventually it will dominate the property
of the universe. And what it does when
it dominates is it drives the universe
not only to expand but to expand at an
accelerated rate faster and faster. Dark
energy. I've heard about the energy of
NPCs from my realtor.
They walk around. They say you should
feel the just feel there's nothing in
here yet, but you should feel this
energy of sell air rights. Right.
Exactly. Maybe they should charge you
extra for the dark energy. Yeah. in the
air rights. Don't give them that idea.
And in 10 to the 22 years, which is a
long time from now, that's a pretty long
time. Pretty long time, but I have it on
my calendar. Um, the dark energy will
become so dominant and the expansion
will become so
accelerated that the fabric of spaceime
cannot keep up with it and it will rip.
Well, that's not You don't want to be
alive there. It's called the big rip.
That's if it goes unchecked. the big
rip. So if there are still humans that
far out, they have to figure a way to to
not have it rip, right? It'll rip the
very structure of the fabric of space
cosmological climate change. Like
they'll have, you know, like does it
happen instantaneously or do they feel
it slowly start to happen or is it like
they're just they just know at a certain
time? I know. You start seeing it all
around you. Stuff starts flying apart.
Oh yeah, look that that face like it's
going to happen in your lifetime. So now
here's the great great great grand.
Maybe you don't know this one. Okay. He
predicts based on general relativity.
Mhm. That if you have an alignment of
two objects, one of them will get lensed
around it and you get what is called an
Einstein ring. Because if two objects
are perfectly aligned together, the
curvature of space will take that light
and spread it into a perfect ring. And
so you would see rings around stars in
the night sky from another star that's
exactly aligned behind it. Here's the
problem. Mhm. Back then the universe was
composed only of stars and stars are so
small at those distances. You would
never get an exact alignment. So he said
this will probably never get observed
until we discover whole galaxies out in
the universe. And so it's no longer a
point of light. The galaxy has a whole
field. So there many places you can be
behind a galaxy and still have this
phenomenon. So we see gravitational
lenses all the time. Yeah. And we we we
see it around black holes. That's how we
detected a black hole. We took a picture
of a black hole because the light from
behind it went above and below and cast
the shadow of the black hole. There's no
above or below in space. Went around.
You in my office went around.
Went
around like it's all north.
So that was one that he predicted
assumed there would never be found. And
then in my lifetime, like while I'm in
graduate school, we'd discover
gravitational lenses cuz people found
these objects hanging off the side. I
said, "What is that? Why is a little
distorted?" A whole arc. It's a whole
arc. And then he took a spectrum of it
and exactly matched the spectrum of the
object on the other side. And that's the
splitting of the light around the
object. So that's another little crumb
that fell off the dude's plate. Okay. So
tell me about black holes themselves.
Yeah. Well, black holes also predicted
from his mathematical theory, but not by
Einstein. He did not predict. Well, you
know, there's it's as I said abundant.
It's endlessly productive. So, black
holes are
crumbs yet to be shaped crumbs. Yeah,
you have to go at the equations to
decide what you want to think about
because it describes every possibility
imaginable. Once you put matter and
energy in, how will space and time
curve? So, I could How does that couch
curve spaceime? Not a great question.
scientifically, not one most people
aren't going to spend their time on, but
one guy decided, you know, it's he's on
the Russian front during World War I. Uh
Carl, yes. Did he die on the front? He
did. He died like six months after I
think there's correspondence with
Einstein where he sends him he said, "I
found a very simple solution to your
equation." Did he die in the front?
Because he was busy writing letters to
Einstein. I know, but not paying
attention to the bullets. Hey, buddy.
You're on the front. Yeah. Um Yeah. I
think he contracted some infection. Oh,
it was quite dire. A lot of people back
then died of non-bullet injuries.
Related. Yeah.
So, but he said imagine it was a thought
experiment. Imagine you took all the
mass of a star and you crushed it to a
point and or it could have been a planet
or it could have been anything. So,
you're imagining that all the masses at
the center in a point. You don't ask how
nature would do such a thing. I don't
even think Schwarzel believed that there
was a way nature would do such a thing.
Certainly Einstein didn't. But the math
was sound. It described the curvature of
spaceime. if you're far away around a
star or the earth, but as you get closer
and closer and all the mass is still in
front of you, eventually you form this
event horizon where not even light can
escape. That's really what we mean by
surface gravity gets higher and higher.
Yeah. Just gets because the mass is
always in front of you. If you think
about it like if I go inside the sun,
the the gravity drops off because I'm
leaving some of the mass behind. Oh,
you're vaporizing vaporizing that
complication, right? It's right. I
always say, you know, black holes are
much more benign than people give them
credit for. You're right. The star is
incendiary, right? Right. But the black
hole you can get real close. So this is
you can't get out. So we call this the
Schwarz solution to Einstein's
equations. Yes. So Schwarz does this.
Yes. And but he dies so no Nobel Prize
for him but it's still an amazing
result. And Einstein doesn't think
they're real. He says it's beautiful. He
helps get it published and he couldn't
believe that that such a simple solution
came out so quickly. It was within six
months or that nature would even allow
it. Yes. He he thought nature would not
allow it. Yeah. that there could be some
something that arises that prevents such
a catastrophic collapse of matter
itself, right? I mean, staring at this
guy. No. Yeah. Well, try to crush a soda
can. It's It's nearly impossible to get
past a certain point. It's hard to do.
It's hard to crush things because
there's matter forces that resist,
right? That's a soda can with soda in
it.
I could otherwise totally crush a soda
can. Okay. Can I be clear about like a
demo and I want to see at only to a
point. You can't make a black hole. No,
not a black hole. Right. Right. Right.
Because the the atomic forces will
resist. Now, so I have to share this
quick story with you. I'm having dinner
with Stephen Hawking and nice flex.
And so I was talking about Isaac Newton.
Mhm. Where he did not figure out that
the solar system was stable using his
own equations. Okay. It turns out in the
solar system, here's the sun and here's
like Earth going around. You're Jupiter.
Every time I go between the sun and
Jupiter, you're saying I'm very big.
So, no, I'm saying you're gashes. I've
been I've been working I've been working
to get to Mars. I'm saying you're you're
bulbous and gaseous. So, Earth comes
around and it feels you would tug a
little because you're closer here,
right? And then over here and it comes
back around. It feels a little tug. So,
all these little tugs, he knew that if
this continued, Earth would just fly out
of its orbit for thousands, millions of
years. this would just be this runaway
destabilizing force going on in the
solar system. And you know what he said?
He said God must step in and fix things
because I that's how badass he is. He
said my I know my equations do my so the
only
thing because we see a stable solar
system. Okay. But late 100 years later,
100 years later, Llas comes up with a
formalism, a branch of he develops with
others, but he develops a branch of
calculus. Mhm. That can demonstrate that
these little tugs, which are multiple
little tugs on a major system, all
cancel out. It's called pertabbation
theory. But it's just a branch of
calculus. The dude invented calculus,
right? Yeah. So you can't you can't
figure that out. So I asked Hawin I said
how come he didn't figure it
out cuz who else are you going to ask if
not Stephen Hawking right? So and you
waited a very very long time for a Yes I
did. Thank you. So so I went on to other
conversations. Right. He's like my
entire with his eye blinks. He's
assembling the answer. Wow. And it must
have been 20 minutes. 20 minutes later
he said something simple and brilliant.
He said, "You can't think of
everything." That took about that 20
minutes to type. No, no, no. You can't
think of everything. And I said, "That
is so beautiful that" And then he went
on to say to follow that with Einstein
did not come up with black holes. That's
right. Because you can't think of
everything. Can't think of everything.
And I said that that that's comforting
actually. I mean, an entire industry of
scientists have been since still working
on Einstein's equations. I got another
one for you. Okay. He wrote a research
paper on the stimulated emission of
radiation. This is an extraordinary
result that you have to kind of be on
the inside to appreciate. Okay, I'll
tell you what it is. You ready? So, you
have an atom with these energy levels
where the electron hangs out. It's in
discrete energy levels. It can't hang
out anywhere. This is quantum. A quantum
is units of anything. Okay? So, it's
quantized. Even solace
quantum Think about it. If you have a
quantum of solids,
very marquees somehow. Yes, it is. So,
the the electron can only be in any one
of these discrete levels at any given
time. And if it's at a higher level,
left to itself, it'll want to deexite
back to a lower level. And it shoots out
a photon in so doing. So, this is what
atoms just want to do. If you excite
them, they want to deexite. We got this.
Okay. So, let's go back to our atom and
we have an electron hanging out in an
energy level. Now, I send in light
photons that are exactly the energy
level that'll boost this up. So, it's
going to absorb those and take them up.
Okay? It's going to do that. However, oh
no, here's what he discovers. that if
you bathe an atom with an electron at a
given level of photons that would boost
it, it will also spontaneously trigger
it to deexite at the same time. Yes.
Exciting and de. No, no, no. I mean it
will it will not all the all the photons
will not go to just boost it. Gotcha.
Being in that bath will also deexite it
for for there's no there's no classical
understanding of that. Okay. So, it's
the stimulated emission of radiation.
Normally, when you stimulate it, it
absorbs it. This one, you shine on it,
it deexites.
Okay. That's a weird result. Yeah. It's
a quantum result that he deduces using
math and quantum physics. Okay. And what
do we get out of this? Well, we got
lasers. Lasers.
You say that so calmly. Lasers. We get
lasers. pull your hair, pull some, grab
some. So, it's really an interesting
history because there were also masers
before lasers, which were microwave
versions of this. And Joe Weber, who
wanted to study gravitational waves, was
working on masers and they were they
were completely overrun by the laser. A
full acronym uh microwave uh
amplitude stimulated emission resonance
or something. Laser. Laser stands for
You get a C minus on that one. Laser
stands for look and stare experience
regret. Oh, very good. On the spot. Or
or it's like remember George Castanza
with the laser pointer. So it's like
look a Seinfeld episode reference. Oh
hey this guy's good. That's very good.
That's very good. Let's from here on let
us call it
so so so the laser is an acronym like
scuba and all these fun acronyms laser
light amplification amplification by the
stimulated emission of radiation and
those are the three words I did in his
paper so so light would be yeah the sir
of laser so it' be visible light but you
can it works with any kind of photons
microwaves it turns out it's easier to
make a microwave laser microwave
amplification by the stimulated emission
of radiation So this was this is just
some paper he does like while he's
taking a crap. All right, and publishes
it and then his boot paper I don't know
if he was actually on experiencing some
brownie in motion if you will.
So brown a brownie in movement. Yes.
Yes. Uh so that for me that's my
favorite is it? Of his crumbs. Of his
crumbs. Interesting. I mean it's it's an
unbelievable technological advance. It's
incredible. It's everywhere. Yeah.
Because because the amplification is if
you emit light in this bath of light and
that light you emit is the same light
when brought around that will deexit it
and emit a photon. So the so it's it's
almost self feeding. The light that it
emits is the same light that it then
absorbs. So this this loop is can you
you can pump light that way with the
right number of molecules in the right
cavity. Oh my gosh. And it becomes very
coherent and very tight beam and very
intense. Yes. So it's a way of getting
like this incredible intensity at this
one very narrow frequency range or light
range. Yeah. And so at the time I'm sure
he was saying to himself skin peel,
right? I was like I'm going to have a
little laser. Yeah. I mean the
application of laser were Oh my god. So
the pe the people who invented the
laser, I think it was Charlie Towns, got
a Nobel Prize for that. Wow. Did you
expect it to be in like a Walmart? Yeah,
I know. At the checkout line. Yeah.
Yeah. No, the first lasers were were
huge. And so just the idea that here's a
paper that 30 years later becomes a
device and the device gets the Nobel
Prize. Incredible. Do you know when
Towns got the Nobel Prize? So the laser
was invented 1956 57 and Einstein died
in 1955. Mhm. So he would not so close
to seeing the lake. So close. So close.
And they were going to operate on him
cuz he had some element that was No. No.
Stop.
And he said he was already in his 70s or
something. He said, "Uh, my work is
done." Did he really? Yes. I thought
that was classy. He was just scared of
medical care.
I mean, he was still so combative with
quantum mechanics. I'm Yeah. He give me
the quote. Which one? The God does not
play dice. God does not play dice.
was it Neils Boore who said back to him
another physicist Einstein stopped
telling God what to do. He kept it was
one of several times he talked about God
and God's intentions because quantum
physics is fundamentally statistical.
It's not does not describe a unique
objective reality. It only describes a
statistical reality. And this felt very
bad to Einstein even though he made
significant contributions to quantum
physics. This feels like a trend though
because Newton also is like I don't know
God.
Yeah, bring a God when you need him. So,
a couple of fast other ones. So, he
predicts out of general relativity that
certain phenomenon should produce
ripples in Oh, yeah. space-time
continuum. Gravitational waves, right?
Gravitational waves. So he says look if
the earth can curve spacetime if the if
the sun can curve space time so that the
earth falls around the sun then if these
systems move around the curves have to
move too. So the curves themselves have
to modulate like waves and he predicted
something called gravitational waves
which are these silent waves in the
shape of spaceime and they are not
visible. It's not light. It's pure
gravity. It's not light, but if you saw
something, you could see a bobbing on
the wave as its path changed um around a
moving object. So, if the sun decides
to, you know, do something crazy, we
would know eight minutes later when the
wave got to us. So, I I think I have
this right. There's a cottage industry
rising up in astrophysics where they're
looking at the pulsars in the galaxy.
Pulsars are very fast rotating stars
that have extremely precise timing.
precise. So if there's a gravitational
wave not coming towards us but passing
across our field of view, we can see the
effect of the turbulent space-time wave
on the timing of the pulsar as it goes
through the wave and then you can see
them move across the universe. They'll
bobble around. They're like buoys on on
the ocean. Yes. They'll just you'll see
this effect as that happens. And so it's
like whoa. So he wrote many papers where
he thought they didn't exist. So he
really struggled with whether or not
these
he had his go right. I don't know black
holes exist but maybe well gravitational
waves were really confounding whether
they carried energy or were real in a
substantive way or was just oh I'm just
changing my coordinates. It's just it's
not physically real. There's no physical
impact. This was confounding for
decades. He once would write he he wrote
papers where he said they do not exist.
They would be accepted for publication
and in the space between publication and
sending it to press, he would change the
entire paper and say they do exist. In
the space between it being accepted,
yes. Between it being accepted and going
into print, he would change the entire
conclusion, rewrite the paper and say
they do exist. He wants to be writing
another papers. Right. Right. Right.
Right. So then we decide maybe we can
detect some of these. And Kip Thorne,
who was a guest on our show, we took
Star Talk to him because he's Kip
Thorne. Right. We we moved the mountain
to Kip Thorne. We went to his home
office in Pasadena. He's a professor at
a emeritus now I think at Caltech and we
talked about Interstellar because he was
a executive producer on Interstellar. He
wrote the original treatment. It's like
his dream idea. He did write the
original treatment. He brought on
Christopher Nolan to to realize those
views. It wasn't the other way around.
So he uh petitions Congress and the
National Science Foundation and other
agencies to and with a lot of support
from other physicists and the like.
Right.
Yeah. To build Mhm. the first
gravitational wave detector. Mhm. And
it's built, it's called LIGO, laser
interferometer gravitational
observatory, LIGO, sensibly abbreviated,
LIGO. And they they they made it really
sensitive to this. They have the two
lasers that go off at right angles and
if a wave washes over Earth, the length
of one laser path will change relative
to the other. They make this
measurement. Mhm. Bada bing, they found
the first colliding black holes which
deposited so much energy into the
space-time continuum that it would have
we'd have a chance of measuring it.
Yeah. I mean, it was the most powerful
event humanity's ever observed since the
observation of the Big Bang itself. More
energy came out of this all in
gravitational waves in utter darkness.
Utter darkness. And yet and that the
power was greater than all the stars in
the observable universe combined at that
moment. So, but it all came out just in
ringing space, literally. So, darkness,
right? Could not see it with a
telescope. And so, think about it. I
love the look on your face. Thank you
for that. He's looking back and forth
like No, no, this is I'm trying to think
of anything else that would be more
powerful than those stars combining. I'm
stuck at Taylor Swift and Travis Kelson.
When those stars came together, we all
felt it. That was a moment. It was a
tectonic ship. So, we discover
gravitational waves. Mhm. That won a
Nobel Prize.
But more so, we discovered gravitational
waves using lasers.
Okay. His crumbs connected. His crumbs
came together and made a big smorgish
board of science and physics and Nobel
prizes for everybody on board. So, can
you get more amazing than that? I mean I
don't I didn't The detection was
essentially in the centenery too of
Einstein. It was in
2015 years after his gravitational wave
papers. Oh man. Yeah. That's Einstein
has something magic. Einstein totally
had something to do with that. Now Janna
memory serves Einstein was a big
proponent of a unified field theory. And
when I first heard that when I was a kid
field, what do you mean by field? I
didn't know that field was synonymous
with forces. Right? So we have
gravitational force, electromagnetic
force, which in its day was the electric
force and the magnetic force and then
the force and
I've seen Star Wars.
Maybe they they maybe they figured it
out. They got the one force, you know.
Uh so with the work of Hinrich Herz and
and others we figured out how to combine
electricity and magnetism to make one
force and we take that word for granted
but they used to be two whole separate
words electromagnetic force. So Einstein
why did he fail at this or what what
what was motivating him? Well we've all
failed at this. So okay, so there's
great success in unifying all of the
matter forces, all of the quantum matter
forces, electromagnetism with the weak
nuclear force and the strong nuclear
force. That's the whole story of matter.
Done. Completely sealed. Yeah. But
they're not there's an outlier. Well, so
the electroeak theory is combined. Weak.
So we went from electro electricity,
magnetism, and the weak nuclear force.
Right. Then we got electromagnetism. And
then with my guy from my high school,
right? Uh um which guy from your high
school?
What? Steve Weinberg and Sheldon Glow.
They and was his high
school. Who's the third one in there? Uh
Salam Salam, right? That's correct. So
the three of them, two of them were
classmates in my high school before me,
but in my high school. Anyhow, they
there was something in the water there.
They managed to conjoin the
electromagnetic force and the weak force
and they called it what? Electroak.
Okay, that's not very creative, but all
right, we'll go with it. But it is
pretty magical. It says that those are
really one force which is magical.
Something that is at nuclear ranges that
we do not experience in our everyday
life separate forces today. You go back
in time there's a point where they were
just one expressed force in the
universe. So that gives us electroeak
strong force and gravitation. Yeah. Now
the strong easily can get in there even
though we don't talk about it very much
anymore. What do you mean easily? If you
did that you'd have a Nobel Prize now.
So well there's something called the
grand unified theories and and they have
certain failures. There isn't like an
ideal grand unified theory, but but
really there's nothing barring the
possibility of it. I mean, it's it's
it's no obvious obstacle. There's no
fundamental obstacle to a grand unified
theory. Most people think it's going to
come along for the ride when we do the
full unification. So, when Einstein said
a unified field theory, was he thinking
just that or was he also want to include
gravity? He wants gravity. He wants
gravity. He wants gravity. It's the same
thing he did when he went from special
to general. When he started thinking
about quantum mechanics, he wants a
quantum theory. Gravity behaves so
differently from the other forces
because you can think of gravity not
even as a force but as the just falling
down the curvature of space and time.
That's geometry. It's geometry. It's not
really a force. So So that could be a
barrier to summing these together. Well,
it's Nobody's ever succeeded at even So
how about Kip Thorne? Does he have some
ideas here? Does he Oh, well I mean Kip
has endless ideas. He does. And I and I
think Interstellar 2. Yes.
I I think Kip's ambition is for yes a
universe that would be completely
comprehensible which would mean we
either understand quantum gravity or we
understand that gravity is not
fundamental those are the two kind of
choices that everything's quantum
mechanics now I don't know quantum
mechanics is the most successful idea
we've ever had about anything in the
universe I don't think any prediction
has ever failed no and and and to the
largest number of decimal points of any
scientific theory in the history of time
whereas general general relativity as
badass as it is We know where its limits
are. Like at the center of a black hole
is a singularity. It gives you a
singularity in the equations. And I
don't know what that's where they say
where God is dividing by zero. You're
not supposed to divide by zero. Yes.
Bad. Well, even Roger Penrose who talked
about the singularity in his Nobel Prize
of recent years. Even in that paper, he
says, I don't really think this part's
going to survive. He really says, uh,
quantum mechanics will probably get rid
of the singularity. So, it was but it
hasn't, but it hasn't done any of the
things it was supposed to do around
gravity. The point is more crumbs more
crumbs the attention of brilliant people
either walk among us or are yet to be
born. I'm just going to throw in because
this is very relevant to this wormholes
which Einstein talked about the Einstein
rose and bridges which ultimately give
rise to wormholes might be involved in
understanding that things like black
holes and gravity aren't fundamentally
real. They're just sort of embroidered
out of quantum wormholes. And so it
might really be another one of
Einstein's crumbs. embroidered out of
quantum wormholes and not threads.
So, more crumbs from Einstein to come.
Wow. Is anybody Is there Keep your eyes
on wormholes. Is there any other
scientist that that is that a messian
eater, so to speak? Has anybody else
left? Isaac Newton was badass, too.
Okay. In fact, I think if Isaac Newton
were a contemporary of Einstein, he
would have done everything Einstein did
and more. Whoa. I'm I'm a Newton guy.
Okay. Yeah, you're you're a real Newton
guy. Yeah. Yeah. You got to give me
something here. Yeah. I'm a Newton guy.
I mean, calculus is pretty impressive.
That's pretty good. Yeah. Just like on a
dare. It's like I I Why are your orbits
moving in ellipses rather than circles?
So, I don't know. Let me get back to you
on that. I'm going to eat an apple.
Yeah. Let me go back. And well, here's
why. And well, how did you do that?
Well, I had to invent integral and
differential calculus to show that.
Okay, Isaac, we So, if you'll indulge me
just for a moment, I need to reflect on
our conversation.
Love me some
mathematics. Why? It was early on when I
learned when I wanted to be an
astrophysicist that the language of the
universe is
mathematics. Now, that's an
extraordinary fact because we just
invented mathematics out of our heads.
The history of math is filled with
examples of I don't know how that works.
let me invent a way to calculate with it
so that I can figure out how it works.
Thus is the rise of of arithmetic and
algebra and trigonometry and
calculus. All of
this helps us commune with the cosmos.
But what makes it even more
extraordinary is you start out with an
idea of how the universe works. But you
can't manipulate that idea because
you're stuck with using only
words. If you make a mathematical
representation of that
idea, then you can manipulate that idea
using the perfect logic of
mathematics. And by doing so, you can
extend the idea in places you didn't
even know the idea could go.
because you're extending it with
perfectly logical
steps from the map of that idea into the
world of mathematics. The fact that that
works for us at
all leaves me in awe of not only the
existence of mathematics but of the
human mind that took us there. And here
we have in the likes of Albert Einstein
laying down a physical idea of how the
universe works, attaching a mathematical
model to it. And the rest of us run with
that mathematical
model. Crumbs from Einstein's plate
leading to Nobel prizes that at some
level should have all gone to him. My
boy should have had eight, nine, 10
Nobel
prizes. But he's sharing his genius with
the rest of us in these the 20th and
21st
centuries. More to come from Einstein's
crumbs and that is a cosmic perspective.
So Jana, thank you for helping out here.
Thanks. I'm always glad to be here. And
you have a podcast. Tell me. Oh, right.
Joy of why. I love that. Joy. The joy of
why. Um that is that's a beautiful
title. Yeah, Quantum Magazine. So, the
story is uh my friend Steve Strogats,
who's the original host of the show.
It's uh by Quantum Magazine from the
Simons Foundation, wonderful science
magazine. His book was called The Joy of
X Mathematician. And I thought it was a
brilliant title. And so, the show was
originally called Joy of X called The
Joy of Lex, which is all about language
and words. There's another one I think
called The Joy of Sex. That started it
all. Yes. Okay. Yeah. Yes. That was the
original. So, Steve and I co-host the
show. It's a lot of fun. We deep dive
hardcore physics. Excellent. Biology,
computer science. Good. And the Simons
Foundation from Jim Simons, the very
successful Wall Street trader. I think
he's the most Wall Street trader there
ever was. And he's the original quant.
His background in in math and and
physics. A brilliant mathematician and
an accomplished mathematician. Like we
still use his mathematical results and
theoretical. I took a ride on his
yacht. It was called the Archimedes.
That's That's classy. Jim was the best.
All right, I think we did justice to the
crumbs here. Oh my gosh. Thank you so
much, guys. Always fun. Yeah, thanks for
filling in those gaps and taking us to
the next step.
And Harrison, you're on the road with
your your routine. Yes, I have my comedy
magic show. Uh, we've been off Broadway.
I'm taking it on the road and I'm doing
a stand up all over the country. And
Harrison Harrison
Greenbomb.com. We'll we'll look for it.
All right. This has been Star Talk, the
Einstein Crumbs
edition. Neil deGrasse Tyson here. As
always, I bid you to keep looking up.
[Music]